Misleading Statistics
Kiron Ang, November 2024

I recently read Darrell Huff's 1954 book *How to Lie with Statistics*.
The book illustrated the many ways that data can be misrepresented and
misleading to deceive the general populace. I've located some examples
of how people today may still fall prey to data-related fallacies.
Below are some misleading statistics from recent news articles:

1. An example of why you should use comparisons to a common baseline:

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Excerpt taken from an article published on Nov. 4, 2024:

https://www.foxnews.com/politics/trump-camp-confident-based-early-
voting-black-leaders-say-harris-struggling


The view from the Trump camp is that registration figures favor 
Republicans, based on mail-in voting, in the battleground states that 
will decide the race. Nearly half the country has already voted. Take 
the crucial commonwealth of Pennsylvania. In 2020, Democrats had a 
7.5% advantage, and that’s now shrunk to a 3-point edge. What’s more, 
just 39% of Democrats who have voted there so far are men, compared to
49% among Republicans. Democratic strategist Tom Bonier, who appears
on MSNBC, says the Pennsylvania electorate is much more Republican, 
and much more male, than last time.
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Although it seems here that the Democrats are losing in Pennsylvania, 
we are not given any details on how many people out of the total 
population have voted. The first figure, "nearly half of the country
has already voted," only applies to the entire nation, and it is 
unclear if half of the people in Pennsylvania also voted already. This
article pulls in many percentages, without ever giving insight into 
population counts of people that are likely to vote by November 5. 
Therefore, it is very difficult to compare "39% of Democrats" and "49%
of Republicans", since we have no clue if the first category contains
1,000 people in total, while the latter may only include 100.

2. An example of why you should check which average is used:

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Excerpt taken from an article published on Nov. 2, 2024:

https://www.theatlantic.com/culture/archive/2024/11/baseball-climate-
change-tropicana-field/680510

The problem, of course, is the weather. Of America’s four major
professional sports, baseball is uniquely vulnerable to climate change
in that it is typically played outside, often during the day, for a
long, unrelenting season: six games a week per team, from March to 
October, which incidentally is when the Northern Hemisphere gets 
steamy and unpredictable, more so every year. In 1869, when the first
professional baseball club was formed, the average July temperature in
New York City’s Central Park was 72.8 degrees. In 2023, it was 79. By
2100, it could be as much as 13.5 degrees hotter, according to recent
projections, hot enough to make sitting in the sunshine for a few
hours unpleasant at best and hazardous at worst. In June, four Kansas
City Royals fans were hospitalized for heat illness during an
afternoon home game. On a muggy day four seasons ago, Los Angeles
Angels starting pitcher Dylan Bundy began sweating so much, you could
see it on TV. He then took a dainty puke behind the mound and exited
the game with heat exhaustion.
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The argument here is that baseball is "uniquely vulnerable to climate
change". However, what is meant by "the average July temperature"? Did
they look at historical data for July 1869, add up all 31 daily
temperatures and then divide by 31? Or did they obtain a median,
rather than an arithmetic mean? Furthermore, did they look at peak
temperatures, or did they also average the temperatures collected at
various points during the day? This is an incredible weakness in the
argument here, because it is unclear to readers what those numbers
even mean, and the only thing we can understand is that they are
increasing over time. However, it is unclear if that will make it
impossible to play baseball; if not all of the days are hot at all
times, then couldn't baseball games be moved to cooler times on 
cooler days?

3. An example of why you should always be wary of “big names” on
   studies and scrutinize authority:

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Excerpt taken from an article published on Nov. 2, 2024:

https://www.vox.com/future-perfect/381551/starbucks-dropping-plant-
milk-upcharge-vegan-tax

According to Switch4Good, a nonprofit that advocates for shifting away
from dairy and has long agitated against the plant milk surcharge, it
costs Starbucks between 9 and 28 cents extra to make a drink with soy,
almond, or oat milk. That means the extra 70- to 80-cent charge could
amount to a markup of more than 700 percent, depending on the milk
alternative. A Starbucks spokesperson told Vox that the decision to
drop the surcharge was made to benefit customers but didn’t answer
questions about Switch4Good’s analysis.
----------------------------------------------------------------------

This is incredibly vague. A range of 9 to 28 cents is already 
questionable, and considering that there are three possible types of
milk that may be responsible, it is difficult to make a solid claim 
without looking at the data ourselves. Even though the main point is
simply to say that using plant milk is generally more expensive, this
raises questions about the analysis performed by "Switch4Good".
Admittedly, this could be an attempt by the author to summarize the
original findings, but even that is still disappointing because there
is no explanation in any part of the full article regarding what 
exactly causes plant milk to be more expensive.

4.

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Excerpt from an article published on November 3, 2024:

https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cz0mlrx0jxno


----------------------------------------------------------------------

5. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Excerpt from an article published on November 1, 2024:

https://www.npr.org/sections/goats-and-soda/2024/11/01/g-s1-30948/
virus-marburg-outbreak-rwanda-unprecedented-success


